Optimal at this altitude,
I can run flat out for a half mile before my hands start shaking.
I'm a cybernetic organism living this yoga method.
Okay.
This episode is brought to you by Athletic Greens.
I get asked all the time,
if you could only use one supplement,
what would it be?
In?
My answer is inevitably athletic Greens.
It is your all in one nutritional insurance.
I recommended it in the four hour body,
did not get paid for that and I travel with it to avoid getting sick.
I take it in the mornings to ensure optimal performance.
It just covers all my basis.
If I can't get what I need through whole food meals throughout the rest of the
day,
and you can get 50 oh my gosh,
50% off.
Yes,
If you go to athleticgreens.com forward slash Tim that's athleticgreens.com
forward slash Tim,
check it out.
It's tasty,
but more important.
It will help you not screw up when you're doing your nutritional plannings.
For me.
It just covers the basis,
takes a load off my mind,
puts a lot in my body and check it out.
athleticgreens.com forward slash.
Tim this episode is brought to you by 99 designs.
99 designs is a great partner for creating and growing your business.
It's a one stop shop for all of your graphic design needs,
whether that's a logo,
website,
business card,
or anything else.
I used 99 designs to get book cover prototypes for the four hour body,
which went on to become a number one New York Times bestseller.
I also use them for banner ads,
illustrations,
and other things.
With 99 designs,
designers around the world compete to create the best design for you.
You give feedback and then pick your favorite.
You end up happy or you get your money back.
It's very simple.
You can check out a few of my own designs and those of yours,
meaning Tim Ferriss,
show listeners@ninetyninedesigns.com forward slash Tim and right now my
listeners,
you guys will get a free $99 upgrade on your first design.
That's 99 designs.com forward slash.
Tim,
check it out.
Hello boys and girls.
This is Tim Ferriss and welcome to another episode of the Tim Ferriss show.
I am so excited for this episode.
You have no idea,
but I'll try to give you an idea.
It's full of announcements,
full of cool projects that I've been working on for a very long time and now
it's been number one,
the Tim Ferriss experiment,
which was an entire season of television,
13 episodes that was exact produced,
hosted by yours truly alongside the Emmy award winning team behind.
No reservations,
mind of a chef,
et Cetera,
is now available in not only the u s but also pretty much every country in the
world.
There are a couple of exceptions,
but check it out.
There are all sorts of shenanigans,
adventures,
injuries,
cataclysms,
et cetera.
Four hour workweek.com forward slash,
TV so just go to four hour work,
week.com forward slash TV,
all spelled out and you can check that out.
You can also see a trailer that shows you highlights of all 13 episodes.
Next we have the Tao of Seneca.
What is the town of Seneca?
Well,
there's a collection of letters called the moral letters to Luke killies and I
have read this entire collection of letters and other letters of Seneca the
author,
probably more than 100 times.
It was my constant companion for the last 10 to 20 years,
and I have given various forms of these letters to more friends than I can count
and several hundred acquaintances.
I feel that strongly about it.
So when people ask me what my favorite book is of all time,
I say this collection of letters,
the problem has been there is no good audio edition.
That was the objective.
So I,
for many months now in collaboration with a fan,
actually a listener and a reader,
John Robinson had been collaborating to put together the Tao of Seneca subtitle,
practical letters from a stoic master three volumes and it covers them all.
Here's the description.
The Tao of Seneca is an introduction to stoke philosophy through the words of
Seneca thought leaders in Silicon Valley tout the benefits of stoicism.
And I'm not just referring to me,
they're not referring to me at all.
Actually many others and NFL management coaches and players like have embraced
it because the principals make them better competitors.
Stoicism is a no nonsense philosophical system designed to produce dramatic real
world effects.
Think of it as an ideal operating system for thriving in high stress
environments.
This is your guide and you can find this on audible,
audible.com forward slash Tim's books.
I'll take you to my book club where I acquire audio rights and produce books
that have had a huge impact on my life.
This is at the top of the list,
Tao of Seneca,
number one most impactful collection of writing on my life period.
So please check it out.
audible.com forward slash Tim's books and there's a sample in this episode that
is what this episode consists of.
Letter 13 specifically on groundless fears.
It is a 12 minute letter.
I think you will enjoy it greatly.
Give it a few minutes,
get warmed up.
Seneca sometimes has a bit of a preamble at the beginning of his letters and
I'll also give you the preface to the book that I put together,
which will give you a lot more context,
but on this letter specifically on groundless fierce,
give it a couple of minutes and also for the women listening,
this is 2000 years old and Seneca makes comments like manliness gains much
strength from dot,
dot,
right.
You can just substitute humans and it is as applicable to women as it is two men
certainly.
And at the end of the preface I list off some of my favorite letters so you can
jump around and pick and choose.
I encourage you to treat the Tao of Seneca as a buffet of letters you can choose
from and revisit often and if you do decide to get the volume one for instance,
volume two,
volume three I do have a very long version,
an essay version of on the shortness of life to start off with.
That is a long one.
That is about an hour,
hour and a half.
You can skip over that if it's too long.
That is where I'll leave things.
I am so excited to bring this to you and so excited for you.
If you haven't heard Seneca before,
you will hear the preface.
You can skip through that if you want,
which I read and then let her 13 on groundless fears.
Check it out.
The town of Seneca,
audible.com forward slash Tim's books and joy.
This is Tim Ferriss speaking the producer of this audio book.
I have an author,
perhaps best known for books with titles at sound like infomercial products,
the four hour workweek and the four hour body which are published in about 45
languages or so.
And I am a tech investor and I've been involved early stage and companies like
Facebook,
Twitter,
Uber,
Alibaba,
and perhaps 30 others.
I only bring up this background because I credit my successes,
whatever they might be in many fields including those tango,
etc. To stoicism and to reading the writing of specifically Seneca,
and that is why I've put so much time into assembling and compiling this book.
And with the help of John bringing it to you,
that is the narrator John Robinson,
a few of us consider ourselves philosophers of course,
and this is usually for very good reasons.
Most of us can recall at least one very irritating pseudo intellectual probably
in college,
who dedicated countless hours to some type of philosophical tail chasing.
And so we associate philosophy with this type of behavior for what?
Well maybe this person was debating what is is,
but somehow posturing as a superior intellect at meal time or over drinks.
It's very irritating.
It's very useless and not unlike the bar scene in goodwill hunting perhaps,
but it is for academics and I think it is for theory.
These are beliefs that many of us have about philosophy.
It's something that you do over wine for fun,
but it doesn't apply to real life.
Fortunately,
there are a few no nonsense philosophical systems that can produce dramatic real
world effects and results.
These were forged and refined an action,
sometimes war stoicism is to me,
perhaps one of the best examples of that and that's what we'll focus on.
Think of it as an ideal operating system for thriving in high stress
environments and that is certainly why it's gained a huge foothold in silicon
valley as one example and professional sports.
So if you study stoicism,
you'll be in very good company.
It's a rule book for making better decisions.
It was popular with the educated elite of the Greco Roman Empire,
but Thomas Jefferson also had Seneca on his bedside table.
Montana had a quote from epic T-TESS carved into the ceiling of his house where
he would see it constantly.
Bill Clinton reads meditations by Marcus Aurelius every year in the NFL,
and this has become big news with an article in sports illustrated.
Management coaches and players alike,
including teams like the Patriots and Seahawks have embraced to us isn't because
it makes them better competitors.
Other proponents include John Stuart Mill and Tom Wolfe.
As I record this,
you might hear that my voice is a little hoarse.
I just finished a 10 day water only fast,
and I don't necessarily recommend doing that,
but it's part of a practice that comes directly from the writing of Seneca
specifically let her 18 which you'll hear on festivals and fasting.
And here is an excerpt to give you a flavor set aside a certain number of days
during which you shall be content with the scanty dust and cheapest affair with
coarse and rough dress sang to yourself all the while is this the condition I so
feared,
it is precisely in times of immunity from care that the soul should toughen
itself beforehand for occasions of greater stress.
And it is wild fortune is kind that it should fortify itself against her
violence and it goes on and on.
But that particular passage,
and there's,
there's a lot more context to it,
led me to the practice of taking a few days per month to eat the cheapest food.
So for instance,
rice and beans,
every meal,
rice and beans costs one to $2 a day.
If you break it down wearing the same clothing.
So the same white tee shirt and pair of jeans remaining unshaven asking myself
all the while,
is this the condition I so feared?
What does that mean?
It means that you are a [inaudible] yourself against unfounded fears.
Because when I find myself defensive,
fearful of losing whatever success or money or prestige or status I might have,
whatever that is,
or it could be any number of other types of fears,
they're usually nebulous.
You worry that your quality of life will drop.
You'll be very unhappy.
But if you rehearse that condition,
the worst case scenario,
you realize that it's not that bad.
And that is tremendously empowering.
It allows you to make better investment decisions.
It allows you to take the steps to start your own company,
quit your job,
start a relationship and a relationship because you are rehearsing the worst
case scenarios instead of letting them bounce around in your skull in a very
unformed,
nebulous way.
So that is one of dozens of examples that I could give you.
The principles are timeless and incredibly practical,
and I particularly like Seneca.
I love Marcus,
really.
I love Epictetus,
but I particularly love Seneca because it's easy to read.
It's pithy and the practices can be applied directly to your life.
Now,
if you were to take some of these letters and replace the name's Luke alias and
other Roman sounding names with John Mary Edward,
they would read like letters from one of your contemporary or friends to
another.
Hey John,
so sorry to hear that you're dealing with that frivolous lawsuit.
Let me tell you how I handled this and how I deal with backstabbing and the
Senate and give you a few tips.
Hey Mary,
I'm so sorry to hear that your friend's mother passed away.
Here's how you might console her,
et Cetera,
et cetera.
They are extremely memorable and that is because Seneca was one of the most
famous playwrights of his day and that leads to another point.
His principles,
his philosophies were used on the front lines.
He was one of the wealthiest people in Rome as ineffective and investment
banker.
I suppose you could think of him as such.
He was also an advisor to the emperor.
Ah,
that didn't always work out all too well for him that,
but that's part of stoicism.
The point being that he was worldclass in several fields.
He had to deal with uncooperative,
powerful in many cases,
human beings all the time and he was able to do well.
And I think that's what separates the philosophers so to speak,
who actually can put rubber to the road and make things happen and philosophy
ologists uh,
as many other people have said to those people who speculate the armchair
quarterbacks,
Seneca was not one of these people.
He was,
he was getting his hands dirty and doing big things.
And the way I suggest you approach this,
and this is certainly the way I have approached it and many people have,
is making Seneca part of your daily practice.
And the way that you do that is set aside 10 to 15 minutes a day.
For me,
it is often walking to get my morning cup of coffee and I will listen to one
letter a day.
And this is highly therapeutic.
It is highly effective as a habit if you want to be more successful in any area.
Personal or professional stoke principles are often practiced in rehabilitation
clinics.
For instance,
with alcoholics,
they don't succumb to impulses.
In the most practical sense,
I suppose it does share a lot in common with cognitive behavioral therapy.
In a sense.
You could think of it as putting the first portion of the serenity prayer into
action,
which reads there many translations of course as God grant me the serenity to
accept the things I cannot change,
the courage to change the things I can and the wisdom to know the difference.
Stoicism is the training ground for putting this into action so you have to
digest it just like good nutrition a little bit every day.
Put in the time one letter,
five to 15 minutes.
It might've been porn on the porch of Xeno,
but it can be used everywhere in the concrete jungle and I'll recommend a few
letters to start with.
If you want to bounce around and I suggest you listen to all of them,
they will apply to you in your life at different points.
Three of my favorites are 13,
18 and 27 so let her 13 on groundless fears,
litter 18 on festivals and fasting.
Let her 27 on the good which abides,
which is also hilarious.
Uh,
John Robinson,
his favorites do not overlap.
They will be very personal.
But if you want a few recommendations to start with,
start at the beginning of this audio book volume one because it features on the
shortness of life,
which I read and listened to at least once a quarter,
usually once a month.
And then letters 1318 and 27 and I have to,
before I part give a heartfelt thanks to John Robinson,
John Robinson,
I found on the Internet I was searching for an audio book of Seneca's letters
and essays and I couldn't find it.
And then one day John Robinson's website pops up.
It turns out he's a fan of mine.
And the four hour workweek heard me talking about Seneca in many different
interviews,
tried to find an audio book.
Also couldn't decided to make it himself and put together,
I think it was 10 to 30 draft essays.
I downloaded them when I was in Costa Rica and needed some recalibration.
I needed to address some unfounded fears of my own and I was blown away.
Whatever voice I had in my head for Seneca,
it was John.
It was perfect and I reached out to him.
We started to collaborate.
We put this entire thing together and he has just been a superstar.
So thank you very much John,
and thank you to all of you for listening.
I am so excited and envious of you in a way.
If you've never heard or been exposed to Seneca before and as he would say,
take care.
Letter 13 on groundless fear.
I know that you have plenty of spirits for even before you began to equip
yourself with maxims which were hold someone potent to overcome obstacles.
You were taking pride in your contest with fortune and this is all the more true
now that you have grappled with fortune and tested your powers for our powers
can never inspire in us implicit faith in ourselves except with many
difficulties have confronted us on this side and on that and if occasionally
even come to close quarters with us.
It is only in this way that the true spirits can be tested.
The spirit that will never consent to come under the jurisdiction of things
external to ourselves.
This is the touchstone of such as spirit.
No prize fighter can go with high spirits into the strife if he has never been
beaten,
black and blue.
The only contestant who can confidently enter the list is the man who had seen
his own blood,
was felt his teeth rattled beneath his opponents fist who has been tripped and
the full force
of his adversaries charge who has been down in body but not in spirit.
One Who as often as he falls,
rises again with greater defiance than ever.
So then to keep up my figure fortune has often in the past got the upper hand of
you and yet you have not surrendered,
but have leaped up and stood your ground.
Still more eagerly for manliness gains,
much strength by being challenged.
Nevertheless,
if you approve,
allow me to offer some additional safeguards by which you may fortify yourself.
There are more things Luke [inaudible],
who's likely to frighten us than there are to crush us.
We suffer more often in imagination than in reality.
I am not speaking with you and the stoic strain,
but in my milder style for it is our stoic fashion to speak of all those things
which provoked,
cries and groans as unimportant and beneath.
Notice.
But you and I must drop such great sounding words,
although heaven knows they are true enough.
What I advise you to do is not to be unhappy before the crisis comes.
Since it may be that the danger is before which you paled as if they were
threatening you will never come upon you.
They certainly have not yet come accordingly.
Some things torment us more than they ought some tormentors before they ought
and some tormentors when they ought not to torment us at all.
We are in the habit of exaggerating or imagining or anticipating sorrow.
The first of these three faults may be postponed for the present because the
subject is under discussion and the case is still in court so to speak,
that which I should call trifling you will maintain to be most serious for.
Of course,
I know that some men laugh while being flogged and that other's wins at a box on
the ear.
We shall consider later whether these evils derive their power from their own
strength or from our own weakness.
Do me the favor.
When men surround you and try to talk you into believing that you are unhappy to
consider not what you hear,
what what you yourself feel and to take counsel with your feelings and question
yourself independently because you know your own affairs better than anyone else
does.
Ask.
Is there any reason why these persons should condole with me?
Why should they be worried or even fearsome infection from me as if troubles
could be transmitted?
Is there any evil involved or is it a matter of merely of ill report rather than
an evil?
Put the question voluntarily to yourself,
am I tormented without sufficient reason?
Am I more roast and do I convert?
What is not an evil into what is an evil?
You may retort with the question,
how am I to know whether my sufferings are real or imaginary?
Here is the rule for such matters.
We are tormented either by things present or buy things to come or by both as to
things present,
the decision is easy.
Suppose that your person enjoys freedom and health and that you do not suffer
from any external injury as to what may happen to it in the future.
We shall see later on today there is nothing wrong with it but you say something
will happen to it.
First of all,
consider whether your proofs of future trouble.
Our sure for it is more often the case that we are troubled by our apprehensions
and that we are marked by that marker rumor which is want to settle wars but
much more often settles individuals.
Yes,
my dear Lou killer use,
we agree to quickly with what people say we do not put to the test those things
which cause our fear.
We do not examine into them we blench and retreat just like soldiers who are
forced to abandon their camp because of a dust cloud raised by stampeding cattle
or thrown into a panic by the spreading of some unauthenticated rumor and
somehow or other.
It is the idol report that disturbs us most for truth has its own definite
boundaries,
but that which arises from uncertainty is delivered over to guesswork and the
irresponsible license of a frightened mind.
That is why no fear is so ruinous and so uncontrollable as panic.
Fear for other fears are groundless,
but this fear is witless.
Let us then look carefully into the matter.
It is likely that some troubles will befall us,
but it is not a present fact.
How often has the unexpected happened?
How often has the expected never come to pass and even though it is ordained to
be,
what does it avail to run out to meet your suffering?
You will suffer as soon enough when it arrives,
so look forward meanwhile to better things.
What shall you gain by doing this time?
There will be many happenings,
meanwhile,
which will serve to postpone or end or pass on to another person.
The trials which are near or even in your very presence of fire has opened the
way to flight.
Men have been let down softly by a catastrophe.
Sometimes the sword has been checked even at the victims throat.
Men have survived their own executioners.
Even bad fortune is fickle.
Perhaps it will come,
perhaps not in the meantime it is not so look forward to better things.
The mind at times fashions for itself,
false shapes of evil.
When there are no signs that point to any evil,
it twists into the worst construction.
Some word of doubtful meaning or at fancy,
some personal grudge to be more serious than it really is considering not how
angry the enemy is,
what to what lengths he may go.
If he is angry,
but life is not worth living and there was no limit to our sorrows.
If we indulge our fears to the greatest possible extent in this matter,
let prudence help you and contend with a resolute spirit even when it is in
plain sight.
If you cannot do this counter one weakness with another and temper your fear
with hope,
there is nothing so certain among these objects of fear that it is not more
certain still that things we dread sink into nothing and the things we hope for
mock us
accordingly.
Weigh carefully your hopes as well as your fears and whenever all the elements
are in doubt,
decide in your own favor.
Believe what you prefer and a fear wins the majority of the votes incline in the
other direction anyhow and cease to harass your soul.
Reflecting continually that most mortals,
even when no troubles are actually at hand or a certainly to be expected in the
future,
become excited and disquieted.
No one calls a halt on himself when he begins to be urged ahead,
nor does he regulate his alarm according to the truth.
No one says the author of the story is a fool and he who has believed it is a
fool as well as he who fabricated it.
We let ourselves drift with every breeze.
We are frightened at uncertainties just as if they were certain.
We observe no moderation.
The slightest thing turns the scales and throws us forthwith into a panic,
but I am ashamed either to admonish you sternly or to try to beguile you with
such mild remedies.
Let another say perhaps the worst will not happen.
You yourself must say,
well,
what if it does happen?
Let us see who wins.
Perhaps it for my best interests,
it may be that such a death will shed credit upon my life.
Socrates was ennobled by the hemlock draft,
wrenched from Kato's hand his sword,
the vindicator of liberty,
and you deprive him of the greatest share of his glory.
I am exhorting you far too long since you need reminding rather than
exhortation.
The Path on which I am leading you is not different from that on which your
nature lead you.
You were born to such conduct as I described.
Hence there is all the more reason why you should increase and beautify the good
that is in you.
But now to close my letter,
I have only to stamp the usual zeal upon it.
In other words,
to commit there to some noble message to be delivered to you.
The fool with all his other faults has this also.
He is always getting ready to live,
reflect my esteemed looky loose what this sane means and you will see how
revolting is the fickleness of men who laid down every day new foundations of
life and begin to build up fresh hopes even at the brink of the grave.
Look within your own mind for individual instances.
You will think of old men who are preparing themselves at that very hour for a
political career or for travel or for business and what his base.
You're then getting ready to live when you were already old.
I should not name the author of this motto except that it is somewhat unknown to
fame and it is not one of those popular sayings of epicurious which I have
allowed myself to praise and to appropriate
farewell.
Hey guys,
this is Tim again.
Just a few more things before you take off.
Number one,
this is five bullet Friday.
Do you want to get a short email from me?
Would you enjoy getting a short email from me every Friday that provides a
little morsel of fun before the weekend and five bullet Friday is a very short
email where I share the coolest things I found or that I've been pondering over
the week.
That could include favorite new albums that I've discovered.
It could include Gizmos and gadgets and all sorts of weird shit that I've
somehow dug up in the the world of the esoteric as I do.
It could include favorite articles that I've read and that I've shared with my
close friends for instance,
and it's very short.
It's just a little tiny bite of goodness before you head off for the weekend.
So if you want to receive that,
check it out.
Just go to a four hour work week.com that's four hour workweek.com all spelled
out and just drop in your email and you'll get the very next one.
And if you sign up,
I hope you enjoy it.
This episode is brought to you by 99 99 designs
is a great partner for creating and growing your business.
It's a one stop shop for all of your graphic design needs,
whether that's a logo,
website,
business card,
or anything else.
I used 99 designs to get book cover prototypes for the four hour body,
which went on to become a number one New York Times bestseller.
I also use them for banner ads,
illustrations,
and other things.
With 99 designs,
designers around the world compete to create the best design for you.
You give feedback and then pick your favorite.
You end up happy or you get your money back.
It's very simple.
You can check out a few of my own designs and those of yours,
meaning Tim Ferriss,
show listeners@ninetyninedesigns.com forward slash Tim and right now my
listeners,
you guys will get a free $99 upgrade on your first design.
That's 99 designs.com forward slash.
Tim,
check it out.
This episode is brought to you by Athletic Greens.
I get asked all the time,
if you could only use one supplement,
what would it be?
In?
My answer is inevitably athletic Greens.
It is your all in one nutritional insurance.
I recommended it in the four hour body,
did not get paid for that and I travel with it to avoid getting sick.
I take it in the mornings to ensure optimal performance.
It just covers all my basis.
If I can't get what I need through whole food meals throughout the rest of the
day,
and you can get 50 oh my God,
50% off.
Yes,
If you go to athleticgreens.com forward slash Tim that's athleticgreens.com
forward slash Tim,
check it out.
It's tasty,
but more important.
It will help you not screw up when you're doing your nutritional plannings.
So for me it just covers the basis,
takes a load off my mind,
puts a lot in my body and check it out.
athleticgreens.com forward slash.
Tim
You want more of the Tim Ferriss show?
You can subscribe to the podcast on iTunes or go to for our blog.com f o u r h
e,
I l o t.com where you'll find an award winning blog,
tons of audio and video interview stories with people like Warren Buffett and
Mike Shinoda from Lincoln Park,
the books plus much,
much more.
Follow Tim on twitter@twitter.com slash t Ferris.
That's t e R R I s s or on Facebook at facebook.com/tim Ferris.
Until next time,
thanks for listening.